What's New - .NET 10 Preview 1 (#44878)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/whats-new/dotnet-10/libraries.md

---
title: What's new in .NET libraries for .NET 10
description: Learn about the new .NET libraries features introduced in .NET 10.
titleSuffix: ""
ms.date: 02/12/2025
ms.topic: whats-new
---

# What's new in .NET libraries for .NET 10

> This article describes new features in the .NET libraries for .NET 10.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article describes new features in the .NET libraries for .NET 10. It has been updated for Preview 1.
```

## Allow specifying ReferenceHandler in `JsonSourceGenerationOptions`

When using source generators for JSON serialization, the generated context will throw when cycles are serialized or deserialized. This behavior can now be customized by specifying the <xref:System.Text.Json.Serialization.ReferenceHandler> in the <xref:System.Text.Json.Serialization.JsonSourceGenerationOptionsAttribute>. Here is an example using `JsonKnownReferenceHandler.Preserve`:

:::code language="csharp" source="../snippets/dotnet-10/csharp/snippets.cs" id="snippet3":::

## More left-handed matrix transformation methods

.NET 10 adds the remaining APIs for creating left-handed transformation matrices for billboard and constrained-billboard matrices. You can use these methods like their existing right-handed counterparts [add xrefs to the existing counterparts] when using a left-handed coordinate system instead.

```csharp
public partial struct Matrix4x4
{
   public static Matrix4x4 CreateBillboardLeftHanded(Vector3 objectPosition, Vector3 cameraPosition, Vector3 cameraUpVector, Vector3 cameraForwardVector)

> ## More left-handed matrix transformation methods

Reviewer 2: Is this a TODO? Or should it be `//` rather than `##`?

Author: Neither, it's a merge mistake 😄

Numerical string comparison is a highly requested feature (<https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/13979>) for comparing strings numerically instead of lexicographically. For example, `2` is less than `10`, so `"2"` should appear before `"10"` when ordered numerically. Similarly, `"2"` and `"02"` are equal numerically. With the new `CompareOptions.NumericOrdering` option, it is now possible to do these types of comparisons:

```cs
StringComparer numericStringComparer = StringComparer.Create(CultureInfo.CurrentCulture, CompareOptions.NumericOrdering);

Console.WriteLine(numericStringComparer.Equals("02", "2"));
// Output: True

foreach (string os in new[] { "Windows 8", "Windows 10", "Windows 11" }.Order(numericStringComparer))
{
    Console.WriteLine(os);
}

// Output:
// Windows 8
// Windows 10
// Windows 11

HashSet<string> set = new HashSet<string>(numericStringComparer) { "007" };
Console.WriteLine(set.Contains("7"));
// Output: True
```

Note that this option is not valid for the following index based string operations: `IndexOf`, `LastIndexOf`, `StartsWith`, `EndsWith`, `IsPrefix`, and `IsSuffix`.

## Adding `TimeSpan.FromMilliseconds` overload with a single parameter

> Previously, we introduced the following method without adding an overload that takes a single parameter:
> 
> ```C#
> public static TimeSpan FromMilliseconds(long milliseconds, long microseconds = 0);
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The <xref:System.TimeSpan.FromMilliseconds(System.Int64,System.Int64)?displayProperty=nameWithType> method was introduced previously without adding an overload that takes a single parameter.
```

Although this works since the second parameter is optional, it causes a compilation error when used in a LINQ expression like:

> ```C#

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```csharp
```

Expression<Action> a = () => TimeSpan.FromMilliseconds(1000);
```

> The issue arises because LINQ expressions cannot handle optional parameters. To address this, we are introducing an overload that takes a single parameter and modifying the existing method to make the second parameter mandatory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The issue arises because LINQ expressions can't handle optional parameters. To address this, .NET 10 introduces an overload that takes a single parameter <!--<xref:System.TimeSpan.FromMilliseconds(System.Int64)?displayProperty=nameWithType>-->. In addition, the second parameter in the existing method is now mandatory:
```

> ```C#

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```csharp
```

Reviewer: xrefs commented out until API is published.

public readonly struct TimeSpan
{
    public static TimeSpan FromMilliseconds(long milliseconds, long microseconds); // Second parameter is no longer optional
    public static TimeSpan FromMilliseconds(long milliseconds);  // New overload
}
```

## ZipArchive performance and memory improvements

> Two significant PRs have been made by contributor @edwardneal in .NET 10 Preview 1 to improve the performance and memory usage of `ZipArchive`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.NET 10 improves the performance and memory usage of <xref:System.IO.Compression.ZipArchive>.
```

> - [dotnet/runtime #102704](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/102704) optimizes the way entries are written to a `ZipArchive` when in `Update` mode. Previously, all `ZipArchiveEntries` would be loaded into memory and rewritten, which could lead to high memory usage and performance bottlenecks. The optimization reduces memory usage and improves performance by avoiding the need to load all entries into memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, the way entries are written to a `ZipArchive` when in `Update` mode has been optimized. Previously, all <xref:System.IO.Compression.ZipArchiveEntry> instances were loaded into memory and rewritten, which could lead to high memory usage and performance bottlenecks. The optimization reduces memory usage and improves performance by avoiding the need to load all entries into memory.
```

Adding a 2GB zip file to an existing archive showed:

- A 99.8% reduction in execution time.
- A 99.9996% reduction in memory usage.

> ### Benchmarks:

Reviewer: Having an H3 here breaks your "two significant PRs" bullet points.

| Method    | Job      | Runtime   | Mean     | Error      | StdDev      | Ratio | RatioSD | Gen0      | Gen1      | Gen2      | Allocated | Alloc Ratio |
|-----------|----------|-----------|---------:|-----------:|------------:|------:|--------:|----------:|----------:|----------:|----------:|------------:|
| Benchmark | Baseline | .NET 9.0  | 4.187 s  | 83.3751 ms | 177.6792 ms | 1.002 | 0.06    | 1000.0000 | 1000.0000 | 1000.0000 | 2 GB      | 1.000       |
| Benchmark | CoreRun  | .NET 10.0 | 9.452 ms | 0.1583 ms  | 0.1322 ms   | 0.002 | 0.00    | -         | -         | -         | 7.01 KB   | 0.000       |

Additional details are provided in [dotnet/runtime #102704](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/102704#issue-2317941700).

> - [dotnet/runtime #103153](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/103153) enhances the performance of `ZipArchive` by parallelizing the extraction of entries and optimizing internal data structures for better memory usage. These improvements address issues related to performance bottlenecks and high memory usage, making `ZipArchive` more efficient and faster, especially when dealing with large archives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Second, the extraction of <xref:System.IO.Compression.ZipArchive> entries is now parallelized, and internal data structures are optimized for better memory usage. These improvements address issues related to performance bottlenecks and high memory usage, making `ZipArchive` more efficient and faster, especially when dealing with large archives.
```

Reading a zip archive showed:

- An 18% reduction in execution time.
- An 18% reduction in memory usage.

> ### Benchmarks:

Reviewer: This is a lot more detailed info than I usually put in the what's new docs. I would suggest removing this section and just saying something like "For more information and detailed benchmarks, see ...".

| Benchmark | Baseline | .NET 9.0  | 25            | 24.677 μs | 0.4903 μs | 0.8842 μs  | 24.563 μs | 1.00  | 0.05    | 20.1721 | 3.3569  | 82.92 KB  | 1.00        |
| Benchmark | CoreRun  | .NET 10.0 | 25            | 18.247 μs | 0.3474 μs | 0.3412 μs  | 18.192 μs | 0.74  | 0.03    | 19.7754 | 3.2654  | 81.13 KB  | 0.98        |
|           |          |           |               |           |           |            |           |       |         |         |         |           |             |
| Benchmark | Baseline | .NET 9.0  | 50            | 67.420 μs | 5.7447 μs | 16.9384 μs | 57.185 μs | 1.05  | 0.35    | 40.5273 | 13.4888 | 166.71 KB | 1.00        |
| Benchmark | CoreRun  | .NET 10.0 | 50            | 41.443 μs | 0.7212 μs | 0.8306 μs  | 41.493 μs | 0.65  | 0.13    | 39.6729 | 0.0610  | 163.16 KB | 0.98        |

Additional benchmarking details provided [in the PR description](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/103153#issue-2339713028).

## Additional `TryAdd` and `TryGetValue` overloads for `OrderedDictionary<TKey, TValue>`

> `OrderedDictionary<TKey, TValue>` provides `TryAdd` and `TryGetValue` for addition and retrieval like any other `IDictionary<TKey, TValue>` implementation. However, there are scenarios where you might want to perform additional operations, so new overloads have been added which return an index to the entry:

Reviewer: Add xrefs here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`OrderedDictionary<TKey, TValue>` provides `TryAdd` and `TryGetValue` for addition and retrieval like any other `IDictionary<TKey, TValue>` implementation. However, there are scenarios where you might want to perform additional operations, so new overloads have been added that return an index to the entry:
```

> ```cs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```csharp
```

public class OrderedDictionary<TKey, TValue>
{
    // New overloads
    public bool TryAdd(TKey key, TValue value, out int index);
    public bool TryGetValue(TKey key, out TValue value, out int index);
}
```

> This index can then be used with `GetAt`/`SetAt` for fast access to the entry. An example usage of the new `TryAdd` overload is to add or update a key/value pair in the ordered dictionary:

Reviewer: Add xrefs for GetAt/SetAt. Do you know about the tool David, Andy, and I wrote to help with xrefs?

```cs

> public static void IncrementValue(OrderedDictionary<string, int> orderedDictionary, string key)

Reviewer: Move to separate code file.

{
    // Try to add a new key with value 1.
    if (!orderedDictionary.TryAdd(key, 1, out int index))
    {
        // Key was present, so increment the existing value instead.
        int value = orderedDictionary.GetAt(index).Value;
        orderedDictionary.SetAt(index, value + 1);
    }
}
```

> This new API is now being used in `JsonObject` to improve the performance of updating properties by 10-20%.

Reviewer: Add xref to JsonObject.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new API is already used in `JsonObject` and improves the performance of updating properties by 10-20%.
```

## Allow specifying ReferenceHandler in `JsonSourceGenerationOptions`

> When using source generators for JSON serialization, the generated context will throw when cycles are serialized or deserialized. This behavior can now be customized by specifying the `ReferenceHandler` in the `JsonSourceGenerationOptionsAttribute`. Here is an example using `JsonKnownReferenceHandler.Preserve`:

Reviewer: Add xrefs.

> ```cs

Reviewer: Move to separate code file.

SelfReference selfRef = new SelfReference();
selfRef.Me = selfRef;

Console.WriteLine(JsonSerializer.Serialize(selfRef, ContextWithPreserveReference.Default.SelfReference));
// Output: {"$id":"1","Me":{"$ref":"1"}}

[JsonSourceGenerationOptions(ReferenceHandler = JsonKnownReferenceHandler.Preserve)]
[JsonSerializable(typeof(SelfReference))]
internal partial class ContextWithPreserveReference : JsonSerializerContext
{
}

internal class SelfReference
{
    public SelfReference Me { get; set; }
}
```

> ## More left-handed matrix transformation methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## More left-handed matrix transformation methods
```

The remaining APIs for creating left-handed tranformation matrices have been added for billboard and constrained billboard matrices. These can be used like their existing right-handed counterparts when using a left-handed coordinate system instead.

> ```cs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```csharp
```
